Add Blocks section to Methods (#655)
crystal-lang/crystal-book: docs/tutorials/basics/70_blocks.md

# Blocks

As we already mentioned in the [methods](./60_methods.md#blocks) section, *blocks* is an interesting and important topic. So let's start defining them:

A *block of code* or *block* for short, is a way to abstract a sequence of interactions between objects. They are commonly used as a method parameter, as a way to parameterize (forgive the redundancy) part of its behavior.

## Blocks and Methods

> Methods may receive a *block* as an argument. And using the keyword `yield` indicates the place in the method's body where we want to "place" said `block`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Methods may receive a *block* as an argument. And using the keyword `yield` indicates the place in the method's body where we want to "place" said block:
```

```crystal-play
def with_42
  yield
end

with_42 do
  puts 42
end
```

We can also use `yield` in more than one place:

```crystal-play
def three_times
  yield
  yield
  yield
end

three_times do
  puts 42
end
```

> Let's see another examples with a common use scenario for *blocks*: collections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see another examples with a common use scenario for blocks: collections.
```

Here are two examples:

```crystal-play
# Example 1
arr = [1, 2, 3]
index = 0

while index < arr.size
  elem = arr[index]

  puts elem + 42

  index = index + 1
end
```

```crystal-play
# Example 2
arr = ["John", "Paul", "George", "Ringo"]
index = 0

while index < arr.size
  elem = arr[index]

  puts "Hello #{elem}"

  index = index + 1
end
```

> As we can see in the above examples, the structures are the same: we want to traverse the array and do *something* with the current element at each step. And here is where *blocks* come handy: we can parameterize that *something* we want to execute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see in the above examples, the structures are the same: we want to traverse the array and do *something* with the current element at each step. And here is where blocks come handy: we can parameterize that *something* we want to execute.
```

> Now, let's rewrite the examples. We are going to declare a new method that will abstract the structure duplicated in both examples: It will receive the array and what we want to do at each step using a *block*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's rewrite the examples. We are going to declare a new method that will abstract the structure duplicated in both examples: It will receive the array and what we want to do at each step using a block:
```

```crystal-play
def with_array(arr)
  index = 0

  while index < arr.size
    elem = arr[index]

    yield elem # yes! we can pass an argument to a block.

    index = index + 1
  end
end

# Example 1
with_array [1, 2, 3] do |elem|
  puts elem + 42
end

# Example 2
with_array ["John", "Paul", "George", "Ringo"] do |elem|
  puts "Hello #{elem}"
end
```

The abstracted structure declared in the `with_array` method is very common and that's why it's already implemented in [Indexable#each](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Indexable.html#each%28%26%3AT-%3E%29-instance-method).

NOTE:
Both blocks declare a parameter (the current element while traversing the array) which we will see next.

## Blocks with parameters

> Like methods, *blocks* may receive parameters declared like this: `| param1, param2, ... |`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like methods, blocks may receive parameters declared like this: `| param1, param2, ... |`.
```

Let's see an example:

```crystal-play
def other_method
  yield 42, "Hello", [1, "Crystal", 3]
end

other_method do |n, s, arr| # here the block declare 3 parameters
  puts "#{s} #{arr[1]}"
  puts n
end
```

### Underscore

> What happens if the *block* we are providing does not use all the passed arguments? In that case we can use an underscore just to indicate that an expected parameter it's not used by the block (so no name needed):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happens if the block we are providing does not use all the passed arguments? In that case we can use an underscore just to indicate that an expected parameter it's not used by the block (so no name needed):
```

```crystal-play
def other_method
  yield 42, "Hello", [1, "Crystal", 3]
end

other_method do |_, _, arr|
  puts arr[1]
end
```

### Unpacking parameters

Now let's suppose we have an array of arrays. And we want to print each  array in the following way: *the first element followed by a hyphen, followed by the second element*.

One way to implement this would be:

```crystal-play
arr = [["one", 42], ["two", 24]]
arr.each do |arg|
  puts "#{arg[0]} - #{arg[1]}"
end
```

> This works, but there is a more readable way of writing the same but using parameter unpacking::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works, but there is a more readable way of writing the same but using parameter unpacking:
```

```crystal-play
arr = [["one", 42], ["two", 24]]
arr.each do |(word, number)|
  puts "#{word} - #{number}"
end
```

NOTE:
We use parentheses to unpack the argument into the different block parameters.

Unpacking arguments into parameters works only if the argument's type responds to `[i]` (with `i` an `integer`). In our example `Array` inherits [Indexable#[ ]](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Indexable.html#%5B%5D%28index%3AInt%29-instance-method)

### Splats

> When the *block* parameter is a [Tuple](../../syntax_and_semantics/literals/tuple.md) we can use auto-splatting (see [Splats](../../syntax_and_semantics/operators.md#splats)) as a way of destructuring the `tuple` in block parameters (and without the need of parentheses).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the block parameter is a [Tuple](../../syntax_and_semantics/literals/tuple.md) we can use auto-splatting (see [Splats](../../syntax_and_semantics/operators.md#splats)) as a way of destructuring the tuple in block parameters (and without the need of parentheses).
```

```crystal-play
arr = [{"one", 42}, {"two", 24}]
arr.each do |word, number|
  puts "#{word} - #{number}"
end
```

NOTE:
`Tuples` also implements [Tuple#[ ]](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Tuple.html#%5B%5D%28index%3AInt%29-instance-method) meaning that we can also use *unpacking*.

## Blocks' returned value

> A *block*, by default, returns the value of the last expression (the same as a method).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A block, by default, returns the value of the last expression (the same as a method).
```

```crystal-play
def with_number(n : Int32)
  block_result = yield n
  puts block_result
end

with_number(41) do |number|
  number + 1
end
```

### Returning keywords

> We can use the `return` keyword ... but, let's see the following example:

Reviewer: OK, this is outright obsessive syndrome kicking in:
```suggestion
We can use the `return` keyword… but, let's see the following example:
```

```crystal-play
def with_number(n : Int32)
  block_result = yield n
  puts block_result
end

def test_number(n)
  with_number(n) do |number|
    return number if number.negative?
    number + 1
  end

  puts "Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`"
end

test_number(42)
```

Outputs:

```console

43
Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`
```

And if we want to `test_number(-1)` we would expect:

```console

-1
Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`
```

Let's see ...

```crystal-play
def with_number(n : Int32)
  block_result = yield n
  puts block_result
end

def test_number(n)
  with_number(n) do |number|
    return number if number.negative?
    number + 1
  end

  puts "Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`"
end

test_number(-1)
```

> The output is empty! This is because Crystal implements *full closures*, meaning that using `return` inside the block will return, not only from the *block* itself but, from the method where the *block* is defined (i.e. `#test_number` in the above example).

Reviewer: `test_number` is not an instance method (but a top-level one).

```suggestion
The output is empty! This is because Crystal implements *full closures*, meaning that using `return` inside the block will return, not only from the block itself but, from the method where the block is defined (i.e. `test_number` in the above example).
```

If we want to return only from the *block* then we need to use the keyword `next`:

```crystal-play
def with_number(n : Int32)
  block_result = yield n
  puts block_result
end

def test_number(n)
  with_number(n) do |number|
    next number if number.negative?
    number + 1
  end

  puts "Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`"
end

test_number(-1)
```

The last keyword for returning from a *block* is `break`. Let's see how it behaves:

```crystal-play
def with_number(n : Int32)
  block_result = yield n
  puts block_result
end

def test_number(n)
  with_number(n) do |number|
    break number if number.negative?
    number + 1
  end

  puts "Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`"
end

test_number(-1)
```

The output is

```console

Inside `#test_number` method after `#with_number`
```

> As we can see the behaviour is something between using `return` and `next`. With `break` we return from the *block* and from the method yielding the *block* (`#with_number` in this example) but not from the method where the `block` is defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see the behaviour is something between using `return` and `next`. With `break` we return from the block and from the method yielding it (`with_number` in this example) but not from the method where the block is defined.
```

## Type restrictions

> Until now we have been using *blocks* without any kind of type restrictions, moreover, we did not declare the block as a method parameter (it was implied by the use of `yield`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until now we have been using blocks without any kind of type restrictions, moreover, we did not declare the block as a method parameter (it was implied by the use of `yield`).
```

> So first, we will declare a *block* as a method parameter: it should be placed last and the parameter's name should be prefixed by `&`. Then we can use `yield` as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So first, we will declare a block as a method parameter: it should be placed last and the parameter's name should be prefixed by `&`. Then we can use `yield` as before.
```

  block_result = yield word
  puts block_result
end

transform_string "crystal" do |word|
  word.capitalize
end
```

Now, we can add type restrictions to our method's parameters:

```crystal-play
def transform_string(word : String, &block : String -> String)
  block_result = yield word
  puts block_result
end

transform_string "crystal" do |word|
  word.capitalize
end
```

Let's focus on the block's type `&block : String -> String`. What we are saying is that the block will receive a `String` and return a `String`.

So, if the block tries to return an `Int` the compiler will say:

```crystal
def transform_string(word : String, &block : String -> String)
  block_result = yield word
  puts block_result
end

transform_string "crystal" do |word|
  42 # Error: expected block to return String, not Int32
end
```

Or if we try to give an `Array(String)` as an input to the block, the compiler will say:

```crystal
def transform_string(word : String, &block : String -> String)
  block_result = yield [word] # Error: argument #1 of yield expected to be String, not Array(String)
  puts block_result
end

transform_string "crystal" do |word|
  word.capitalize
end
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

NOTE:
Adding a name to a block is useful in rare occasions, like when [capturing a block](https://crystal-lang.org/reference/1.7/syntax_and_semantics/capturing_blocks.html). For the most common cases, the name is omitted, writing just `&` (optionally with the type restriction as in `& : String -> String`).

```

## Alternative syntaxes

> We almost at the end of this section. Let's see some other interesting ways of writing *blocks*.

Reviewer: This comment suggest the section ends with this subsection, but there's one more subsection below.

```suggestion
There are two handy ways of writing blocks concisely.
```

### Curly braces

> Another way of defining a *block* is using `{...}` instead of `do ... end`. Here is one of the examples we have already seen but written with *curly braces syntax*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way of defining a block is using `{...}` instead of `do ... end`. Here is one of the examples we have already seen but written with *curly braces syntax*:
```

```crystal-play
def other_method
  yield 42, "Hello", [1, "Crystal", 3]
end

other_method { |n, s, arr|
  puts "#{s} #{arr[1]}"
  puts n
}
```

> Here is the  `_` example written with *curly braces syntax* and in one line:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the  `_` example written with curly braces syntax and in one line:
```

```crystal-play
def other_method
  yield 42, "Hello", [1, "Crystal", 3]
end

other_method { |_, _, arr| puts arr[1] }
```

The main difference between using `do ... end` and `{ ... }` is how they bind the call:

- `do ... end` binds to left-most call
- `{ ... }` binds to the right-most call

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Let's see with an example this difference:
```

```crystal-play
def generate_number
  42
end

def with_double(n : Int32)
  yield n * 2
end

with_double generate_number do |n|
  puts n
end

# Same as:
with_double(generate_number) do |n|
  puts n
end
```

> But with `curly braces syntax`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But with the curly braces syntax:
```

```crystal
def generate_number
  42
end

def with_double(n : Int32)
  yield n * 2
end

with_double generate_number { |n| puts n } # Error: 'generate_number' is not expected to be invoked with a block, but a block was given
```

> The error is because with *curly braces* we are writing: `with_double(generate_number { |n| puts n })` instead of `with_double(generate_number) { |n| puts n }`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The error is because with curly braces we are writing: `with_double(generate_number { |n| puts n })` instead of `with_double(generate_number) { |n| puts n }`
```

### Short one-parameter syntax

We can use a short syntax with the block parameter if:

- It is a single block parameter.
- One method is invoked on the block parameter.

For example

```crystal-play
def transform_hello_crystal
  puts yield "hello crystal"
end

transform_hello_crystal { |param| param.capitalize }

# and here is using short one-parameter syntax:
transform_hello_crystal(&.capitalize)

# and we can omit parentheses:
transform_hello_crystal &.capitalize
```

> The output should be "Hello crystal". What if we want to capitalize every word.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output should be "Hello crystal". But how do we want to capitalize every word?
```

```crystal-play
def transform_hello_crystal
  puts yield "hello crystal"
end

transform_hello_crystal &.split.map(&.capitalize).join(' ')
```

Great! Let's explain it step by step:

> First we split the block parameter using the *short one-parameter syntax* `&.split`. Then, we chained the result applying `map` and using again the *short one-parameter syntax* `.map(&.capitalize)`. And finally we join the `array` of `strings` using `join(' ')`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First we split the block parameter using the *short one-parameter syntax* `&.split`. Then, we chained the result applying `map` and using again the short one-parameter syntax `.map(&.capitalize)`. And finally we join the `array` of `strings` using `join(' ')`.
```

> Now, what if we want to parameterize the string we transform. Can we still use the *short one-parameter syntax*? The answer is yes! Let's see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, what if we want to parameterize the string we transform. Can we still use the short one-parameter syntax? The answer is yes! Let's see:
```

```crystal-play
def transform_string(word : String)
  puts yield word
end

transform_string("hello crystal", &.split.map(&.capitalize).join(' '))
```

## Under the hood

> Before finishing this section of the tutorial, it would be a good idea to see how *blocks* work under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before finishing this section of the tutorial, it would be a good idea to see how blocks work under the hood.
```

> First, it's important to note that in this section we have only seen *blocks* that we use with the keyword `yield`. There is [another kind of block](../../syntax_and_semantics/capturing_blocks.md), but we will leave it for later in the tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, it's important to note that in this section we have only seen blocks that we use with the keyword `yield`. There is [another kind of block](../../syntax_and_semantics/capturing_blocks.md), but we will leave it for later in the tutorial.
```

> In a method that receives a *block*, when we write `yield`, the compiler will inline the *block of code*, which means that this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a method that receives a block, when we write `yield`, the compiler will inline the block of code, which means that this:
```
